feat: `CXL` documentation (#2260)
cap-js/docs: cds/cxl.md

---
# layout: cds-ref
shorty: Expressions
synopsis: >

>   Specification of the Core Expression Notation (CXN) used to capture expressions as plain JavaScript objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Specification of the Core Expression Language (CXL) used to capture expressions in the CDS model.
```

- In queries as part of the select list or where clause
- In calculated elements
- In annotations, where supported

::: info 💡 expressions in CAP are materialized in the context of queries
No matter where `CXL` is used, it always manifests in queries.
For example, [a calculated element](./cdl/#calculated-elements) defined in an entity will be resolved
to the respective calculation in the generated query when the entity is queried.
:::

## How to read this guide { #how-to }

In the following chapters we illustrate the `CXL` syntax based on simple and more complex examples.
For a complete reference of the syntax, there are clickable syntax diagrams for each language construct.

### samples

To try the samples by yourself, create a simple CAP app:

```sh
cds init bookshop --add sample && cd bookshop
```

We encourage you to play around with the snippets.
Just create the sample app as described above and start a repl session within the newly created app by running:

```sh
cds repl --run .
```

:::info 💡 All of the example expressions follow the same pattern:
1. A **CAP Style `CXL`** is shown in the context of a query.
2. The equivalent **SQL Style `CXL`** is shown.

> 3. The resulting **SQL output** is shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The resulting **SQL output** is shown.
```

A `ref` (short for reference) is used to refer to an element within the model.
It can be used to navigate along [path segments](#path-segment). Such a navigation is often
referred to as a **path expression**.

<div class="diagram">
  <Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" /> 
  <div v-html="ref"></div>
</div>

## path segment { #path-segment }

[Path expressions](#ref) can't be explained without the corresponding path segments.
In the context of a path expression path segments can be used to navigate along
an association, or to access a structured element.

<div class="diagram">
  <Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" /> 
  <div v-html="pathSegment"></div>
</div>

### path expression in the select list

A path expression can be used to navigate to any element of the associations target:

:::code-group
```js [CQL]
> await cds.ql`SELECT from Books { author.name, genre.name }` // [!code focus]
[
  { author_name: 'Emily Brontë', genre_name: 'Drama' },
  { author_name: 'Charlotte Brontë', genre_name: 'Drama' },
  { author_name: 'Edgar Allen Poe', genre_name: 'Mystery' },
  { author_name: 'Edgar Allen Poe', genre_name: 'Romance' },

>   { author_name: 'Richard Carpenter', genre_name: 'Fantasy' }

Reviewer: > `SELECT from Books { author.name, genre.name }`

This is a very fortunate example:

```cds
entity MyBooks as SELECT from Books { author.name, genre.name }
```

would result in an entity MyBooks with a duplicate element `name` -> 💣

To avoid the conflict, we could use

```sql
SELECT from Books { title, author.name }
```

here we don't get a conflict but the nasty issue that if used in a view definition's query specification we get the elements `title` and `name`. But if the very same query is executed by the CAP Node.js runtime the result type has the elements `title` and `author_name`.

Also in CAP Java the query 

```java
Select.from("Books").columns("title", "author.name")
```

returns, when executed a result with elements `title` and `name` - just as the CDS Compiler does.

We could fix this/avoid the confusion by using

```sql
SELECT from Books { title, author.name as author }
```

Please note that this is confusion is only caused by how the default display name of an "inline" is determined. This difference should be explained in the CAP Node.js docu. For expressions, the difference is actually not relevant.

]
```

```sql [SQL]
SELECT
  author.name as author_name,
  genre.name as genre_name
FROM
  sap_capire_bookshop_Books as B
  left JOIN sap_capire_bookshop_Authors as author ON author.ID = B.author_ID
  left JOIN sap_capire_bookshop_Genres as genre ON genre.ID = B.genre_ID
```
:::

In this example, we select the names of the authors and genres of books.
Both `author` and `genre` are associations on the `Books` entity.

> ::: info 💡 Associations are **forward declared joins**

Reviewer 2: [ChatGPT agrees](https://chatgpt.com/share/693bd2cf-bae4-8006-bf95-b43fa488df81). Not that that is always a good indicator...

Reading the wiki page, I'd also agree that the term does not fit for associations, particularly compared with its typical usage. In associations we fully define the join, even if we may later add to it through infix filters.

What do you think about "predefined joins" or "predefined joins for path navigation"?

I think we need to discuss this further

> ::: info 💡 Associations are **forward declared joins**

Reviewer 2: [ChatGPT agrees](https://chatgpt.com/share/693bd2cf-bae4-8006-bf95-b43fa488df81). Not that that is always a good indicator...

Reading the wiki page, I'd also agree that the term does not fit for associations, particularly compared with its typical usage. In associations we fully define the join, even if we may later add to it through infix filters.

What do you think about "predefined joins" or "predefined joins for path navigation"?

I think we need to discuss this further

An association can be used just as a table alias.
They are declared **before** they are used (e.g. in an entity definition)
Once an association is traversed in a query, the respective join is added automatically.
:::

### path expression after `exists` predicate

path-expressions can also be used after the `exists` predicate to check for the existence.
This is especially useful for to-many relations.

In the example a path expression combined with an [infix-filter](#infix-filter),
allows to select all authors that have written at least one book in the `Fantasy` genre.

:::code-group
```js [CQL]
> await cds.ql`

>   SELECT from ${Authors} as FantasyAuthors { name }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  SELECT from ${Authors} { name }
```

The alias is not used and does not add any value. Please also adjust the SQL below.

  where exists books.genre[name = 'Fantasy']` // [!code focus]

[ { name: 'Richard Carpenter' } ]
```

```sql [SQL]
SELECT FantasyAuthors.name
FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Authors AS FantasyAuthors
WHERE EXISTS (
  SELECT 1
  FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Books AS "$b"
  WHERE "$b".author_ID = FantasyAuthors.ID
    AND EXISTS (
      SELECT 1
      FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Genres AS "$g"
      WHERE "$g".ID = "$b".genre_ID
        AND "$g".name = 'Fantasy'
    )
);
```
:::

::: info 💡 TODO
???
:::

### conclusion

A `ref` can be used to reference an element.
It is possible to navigate along [path segments](#path-segment) to reference elements within the model.
This is not limited to an entities own elements, but can also be used to navigate associations to elements of related entities.

> This is only the tip of the iceberg.

Reviewer: > tip of the iceberg

sound a bit like danger looming below the surface

```cds
select from Books {
  42                     as answer,         // literal
  title,                                    // reference ("ref")
  price * quantity       as totalPrice,     // binary operator
  substring(title, 1, 3) as shortTitle,     // function call
  author.name            as authorName,     // ref with path expression
  chapters[number < 3]   as earlyChapters,  // ref with infix filter
  exists chapters        as hasChapters,    // exists
  count(chapters)        as chapterCount,   // aggregate function
}
```

### syntax <Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" />

<div class="diagram" v-html="expr"></div>

TODO: some text and more examples

## ref (path expression) { #ref }

A `ref` (short for reference) is used to refer to an element within the model.
It can be used to navigate along path segments. Such a navigation is often
referred to as a **path expression**.

<div class="diagram">
  <Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" /> 
  <div v-html="ref"></div>
</div>

### simple element reference

:::code-group

> ```js [CQL] {3,4,5}

Reviewer 3: Why only 3,4,5? Have 6 and 7 been added later and just missed to be included here?

<img width="783" height="370" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b974e292-1897-4490-bc5c-fbdedbf9c236" />

```suggestion
```js [CQL] {3-7}
```

Author: was a copy paste error or something like that :)

  price * quantity       as totalPrice,     // binary operator
  substring(title, 1, 3) as shortTitle,     // function call
  author.name            as authorName,     // ref with path expression
  chapters[number < 3]   as earlyChapters,  // ref with infix filter
  exists chapters        as hasChapters,    // exists
  count(chapters)        as chapterCount,   // aggregate function
}
```

<div class="diagram">
<Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" />
<div  v-html="expr"></div>
</div>

TODO: Some samples --> Where can we use expressions?

- annotation expression
- calculated element
- one in select

## ref (path expression) { #ref }

A `ref` (short for reference) is used to refer to an element within the model.
It can be used to navigate along path segments. Such a navigation is often
referred to as a **path expression**.

<div class="diagram">
  <Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" /> 
  <div v-html="ref"></div>
</div>

::: info 💡 Leaf elements
Leaf elements as opposed to associations and structured elements represent scalar values, such as strings, numbers, dates, as well as the array and map types.

> They typically manifest as columns in database tables.

Reviewer: > They typically manifest as columns in database tables.

... if you execute the expression against a relational database 
... or in a [path expression](https://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/odata-v4.01-part2-url-conventions.html#_Toc31361034) in OData

:::

### simple element reference

In its simplest form, a `ref` can be used to reference an element:

:::code-group
```js [CQL] {1}

> > await cds.ql`SELECT from Books { title }` // [!code focus]

Reviewer: > await cds.ql`SELECT from Books { title }`

I think this `await cds.ql` adds little value. This chapter is about explaining the QL. We think it's helpful to explain the QL in the context of a Select statement. But why do we need to put this Select statement` in the context of `await cds.ql`? This makes it confusing, I think.

```sql [SQL]
SELECT
    title,
    author.name AS author
FROM
    sap_capire_bookshop_Books AS Books
    LEFT JOIN sap_capire_bookshop_Authors AS author -- The table alias for association 'author'
        ON author.ID = Books.author_ID;
```
:::

In this example, we select all books together with the name of their author.
`author` is an association in the `Books` entity.

::: info 💡 Associations are **forward-declared joins**
They provide a convenient way to navigate between related entities without having to define the join conditions manually.

The join condition is defined **ahead of time** as part of the association.
Typically, this is a foreign key relationship between two entities, but other conditions are also possible.

It then manifests whenever the association is used in a path expression as part of a query.

The condition can manifest in multiple ways:
- In the on condition of a join
- In the condition that correlates a subquery to a main query
- To select related entities with an additional query
:::

### in the from clause {#in-from-clause}

A path expression can also be used in the `from` clause of a query to navigate to a related entity:

:::code-group
```js [CQL]

> > await cds.ql`SELECT from Books:author { name }` // [!code focus]

Reviewer: > SELECT from Books:author { name }

Shouldn't it be `Books.author` ? What's the difference?

I think this example is not typical. Here we select all authors which are reachable by navigation from any book.

I'd prefer an example like 

```sql
Select from Order[id = 17].items
```

This much closer to what you find in "real life".

[
  { name: 'Emily Brontë' },
  { name: 'Charlotte Brontë' },
  { name: 'Edgar Allen Poe' },
  { name: 'Richard Carpenter' }
]
```

```sql [SQL]
SELECT Authors.name
FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Authors as Authors

> WHERE exists (

Reviewer: CAP Java would use an inner join here. This semi-join might be advantegous.

An infix in linguistics refer to a letter or group of letters that are added in the middle of a word to make a new word.

If we apply this terminology to [path-expressions](#ref), an infix filter condition is an expression 
that is applied to a path-segment of a [path-expression](#ref).
This allows to filter the target of an association based on certain criteria.

<div class="diagram">
<Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" /> 
<div v-html="infixFilter"></div>
</div>

::: info 💡 infix notation as a way to influence auto-generated subqueries
Within an infix, more than than just a simple `WHERE` condition can be specified.
It is also possible to use other query modifiers, such as `GROUP BY`, `HAVING`, `ORDER BY`, `LIMIT`, and `OFFSET`.

::: details see the full syntax diagram

TODO: make diagram more readable (use vertical dimension)

<div class="diagram">
<Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" /> 
<div v-html="infixFilterFull"></div>
</div>

  ::: warning
  Query modifiers other than `WHERE` may only be used in the context of nested projections
  and `exists` predicates. They are ignored for regular path expressions.

> :::

Reviewer: danger zone!

It is also possible to influence the generated subquery,
by adding other query modifiers, such as `GROUP BY`, `HAVING`, `ORDER BY`, `LIMIT`, and `OFFSET`:

::: code-group
```js [CQL] {3}
> await cds.ql`
    SELECT from Authors { name,
      books[ price < 19.99 order by title desc ] as cheapBooks {
        title,
        price
      } 
    }`

[
  {
    name: 'Emily Brontë',
    cheapBooks: [ { title: 'Wuthering Heights', price: 11.11 } ]
  },
  {
    name: 'Charlotte Brontë',
    cheapBooks: [ { title: 'Jane Eyre', price: 12.34 } ]
  },
  {
    name: 'Edgar Allen Poe',
    cheapBooks: [
      { title: 'The Raven', price: 13.13 },
      { title: 'Eleonora', price: 14 }
    ]
  },
  { name: 'Richard Carpenter', cheapBooks: [] }
]
```

```sql [SQL]
SELECT Authors.name,
  (
    SELECT jsonb_group_array(jsonb_insert('{}', '$."title"', title)) as _json_
    FROM (
        SELECT cheapBooks.title
        FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Books as cheapBooks
        WHERE Authors.ID = cheapBooks.author_ID
          and cheapBooks.price < 19.99
        ORDER BY title DESC -- ORDER BY added to subquery
      )
  ) as cheapBooks
FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Authors as Authors
```
:::

> TODO: add some short explanation and the limitations

Reviewer: Limitation for CAP Java:

we support expand with limit and order by programatically but if a nested projection uses limit and order by this would not be supported, I'm afraid.

### applied to `from` clause

:::code-group
```js [CQL]
> await cds.ql`SELECT from Books[price > 19.99]:author { name }` // [!code focus]
[ { name: 'Richard Carpenter' } ]
```

```sql [SQL]
SELECT Authors.name
FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Authors as Authors
WHERE exists (
  SELECT 1
  FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Books as Books
  WHERE Books.author_ID = Authors.ID
    and Books.price > ?
)
```
:::

TODO: explanation and intro to the next sample with [query modifiers](#with-query-modifiers)

:::code-group

```js [CQL] {3,4,5}
await cds.ql`

>   SELECT from Books[

Reviewer: > Books[
    where stock > 0
    group by genre
    order by genre asc
  ]
  
  Not sure how I understand which set this is. Is this a set of entities, which consist only have a single element "genre"? Why is this set sorted. This is all a bit confusing.
  
  I have never seen these constructs.

    where stock > 0
    group by genre
    order by genre asc
  ]
  {
    avg(price) as avgPrice,
    genre.name
  }
`
[
  { avgPrice: 11.725, genre_name: 'Drama' },
  { avgPrice: 150, genre_name: 'Fantasy' },
  { avgPrice: 14, genre_name: 'Romance' },
  { avgPrice: 13.13, genre_name: 'Mystery' }
]

```

```sql [SQL] {6,7,8}
SELECT
  avg(Books.price) as avgPrice,
  genre.name as genre_name
FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Books as Books
  left JOIN sap_capire_bookshop_Genres as genre ON genre.ID = Books.genre_ID
WHERE Books.stock > 0
GROUP BY Books.genre_ID
ORDER BY Books.genre_ID ASC
```
:::

::: details The above is equivalent to…

Using the infix notation to specify the query modifiers is just
syntactic sugar:

```js
await cds.ql`
  SELECT from Books
  {
    avg(price) as avgPrice,
    genre.name
  }
  where stock > 0
  group by genre

>   order by genre asc`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  group by genre.name
  order by genre.name`
```

}
```

This syntax diagram describes the possible expressions:

<div class="diagram">
<Badge class="badge-inline" type="tip" text="💡 clickable diagram" />
<div  v-html="expr"></div>
</div>

::: tip
An expression can be used in various places, in the following sections we will give a brief overview of _some_ use cases.
:::

### in model definitions

Expressions can be used to define calculated elements.
Typically, this is done on the select list of a query. CAP
also allows to define calculated elements directly in the model:

```cds
extend Books with {

>   total = price * stock;

Reviewer: please add a type
```suggestion
  total = price * stock : Decimal(8,2);
```

    ON genre.ID = Books.genre_ID
WHERE
  genre.name = ?
```
:::

In this example, we select all books that belong to the `Fantasy` genre.
The table alias for the `genre` association is used in the where clause of the SQL query.

### in order by

A path expression can also be used in the `order by` clause to sort based on elements of related entities:

:::code-group
```js [CQL] {4}
> await cds.ql`
  SELECT from Books
  { title, author.dateOfBirth as birthDate }
  order by author.dateOfBirth`
[
  { title: 'The Raven', birthDate: '1809-01-19' },
  { title: 'Eleonora', birthDate: '1809-01-19' },
  { title: 'Jane Eyre', birthDate: '1818-04-21' },
  { title: 'Wuthering Heights', birthDate: '1818-07-30' },
  { title: 'Catweazle', birthDate: '1929-08-14' }
]
```

```sql [SQL]
SELECT
  Books.title,
  author.dateOfBirth AS birthDate
FROM
  sap_capire_bookshop_Books AS Books
  LEFT JOIN sap_capire_bookshop_Authors AS author
    ON author.ID = Books.author_ID
ORDER BY
  author.dateOfBirth ASC
```
:::

In this example, we select all books and order them by the date of birth of their authors.
The table alias for the `author` association is used in the order by clause of the SQL query.

> 

Reviewer: please add a hint that you should any path expression used in order by should also be on the select list

### after `exists` predicate

> path expressions can also be used after the `exists` predicate to check for the existence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
path expressions can also be used in the `exists` predicate to check wether the set that is referenced by the path is not empty.
```

SELECT from Books { title } where genre.name = 'Fantasy'
```

### in model definitions

Expressions can be used to define calculated elements.

> Typically, this is done in a column of a query. CAP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, this is done on the select list of a query. CAP
```

    ) + (
      (
        case
          when (cast(strftime('%Y%m', coalesce(Authors.dateOfDeath,date(session_context('$now')))) as Integer) < cast(strftime('%Y%m', Authors.dateOfBirth) as Integer)) then
            (cast(strftime('%d%H%M%S%f0000', coalesce(Authors.dateOfDeath,date(session_context('$now')))) as Integer) > cast(strftime('%d%H%M%S%f0000', Authors.dateOfBirth) as Integer))
          else
            (cast(strftime('%d%H%M%S%f0000', coalesce(Authors.dateOfDeath,date(session_context('$now')))) as Integer) < cast(strftime('%d%H%M%S%f0000', Authors.dateOfBirth) as Integer)) * -1
        end
      )
    )
  ) / 12
) as age -- here the calculated element is resolved, in this case for sqlite
FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Authors as Authors
```
:::

the `years_between` function is one of CAPs portable functions that calculates the number of years between two dates.

[Learn more about calculated elements](./cdl.md#calculated-elements){ .learn-more }
[Learn more about CAPs portable functions](../guides/databases/cql-to-sql.md#portable-functions){ .learn-more }

### in queries

> Expressions can be used in various parts of a query, e.g., in the select list, in the where clause, in order by clauses, and more:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expressions can be used in various parts of a query, e.g., on the select list, in the where clause, in order by clauses, and more:
```

:::

In this example, we select all books together with the name of their author.
The association `author` defined in the `Books` entity relates a book to it's author.

When navigating along a to-many association to a leaf element, the result is flattened:

:::code-group
```js [CQL]

> > await cds.ql `SELECT from Authors { books.title as title, name as author }` // [!code focus]

Reviewer 2: As [mentioned](https://github.com/capire/docs/pull/2260#discussion_r2667589016), it was requested by Daniel -> need to discuss this together. Until then, I'm keeping it in the PR

This conforms to the core principle [what-not-how](../guides/domain/index#capture-intent-—-what-not-how) of CAP.
:::

## literal value { #literal-value }

Literal values represent constant data embedded directly in an expression.
They are independent of model elements and evaluate to the same value.

<div class="diagram" >
<div v-html="literalValue"></div>
</div>

:::code-group
```js [cds repl]
> cds.parse.expr ` 42 `
{ val: 42 }
> cds.parse.expr ` 'Hello World' `
{ val: 'Hello World' }
> cds.parse.expr ` null `
{ val: null }
> cds.parse.expr ` true `
{ val: true }
> cds.parse.expr ` false `
{ val: false }
> cds.parse.expr ` Date'2026-01-01' `
{ val: '2026-01-01', literal: 'date' }
> cds.parse.expr ` Time'08:42:15.000' `
{ val: '08:42:15.000', literal: 'time' }
> cds.parse.expr ` TimeStamp'2026-01-14T10:30:00Z' `

> { val: '2026-01-14T10:30:00Z', literal: 'timestamp' }

Reviewer: This is ISO 8601. Is this portable on all DBs? I.e., will 

```cds
entity Start : cuid {
  start : Timestamp default TimeStamp'2026-01-14T10:30:00Z'
}
``` 

actually work?  

Or rather use ISO/IEC 9075

```suggestion
> cds.parse.expr ` TimeStamp'2026-01-14 10:30:00' `
{ val: '2026-01-14 10:30:00', literal: 'timestamp' }
```

?

</div>

### applied to `exists` predicate

In this example, we want to select all authors with books that have a certain stock amount.
To achieve this, we can apply an infix filter to the path segment `books` in the exists predicate:

:::code-group
```js [CQL]
await cds.ql`SELECT from Authors { name } where exists books[stock > 100]`
[ { name: 'Edgar Allen Poe' } ]
```
```sql [SQL]
SELECT
  name
FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Authors as Authors
WHERE exists (
  SELECT 1
  FROM sap_capire_bookshop_Books as books
  WHERE books.author_ID = Authors.ID
    and books.stock > 100
)
```
:::

Exist predicates with infix filters can also be nested.
Here we select all authors that have written at least one book in the `Fantasy` genre:

:::code-group
```js [CQL]
> await cds.ql`
    SELECT from Authors { name }

>     where exists books[exists genre[name = 'Fantasy']]` // [!code focus]

Reviewer 2: We tried this in java and it did not work:
```java
		CqnSelect select = Select.from(Authors_.class).columns(a -> a.name())
		.where(a -> a.books()
			.filter(b -> b.genre().name().eq("Fantasy"))
			.exists());
		Result res = db.run(select);
```

```json
{
  "SELECT": {
    "from": { "ref": ["AdminService.Authors"] },
    "columns": [{ "ref": ["name"] }],
    "where": [
      {
        "xpr": [
          "EXISTS",
          {
            "ref": [
              {
                "id": "books",
                "where": [
                  { "ref": ["genre", "name"] },
                  "=",
                  { "val": "Fantasy" }
                ]
              }
            ]
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```
```
Path {\"ref\":[\"genre\",\"name\"]} in infix filter is not supported 
```

Also, we like the sequence of examples. We first have a very simple infix filter and then we show that we can also nest infix filters. We'd like to also add `exists books[genre.name = 'Fantasy'] ` again once the compiler and Java supports it. Currently, it only works in cds.ql.

:::

### between path segments

Assuming you have the [calculated element](#in-calculated-element) age in place on the Authors entity:

```cds
extend Authors with {
  age = years_between(dateOfBirth, coalesce(dateOfDeath, $now));
}
```

In this case we want to select all books where the author's name starts with `Emily`
and the author is younger than 40 years.

:::code-group
```js [CQL]
> await cds.ql `SELECT from Books { title, author[age < 40].name as author }` // [!code focus]

[
  { title: 'Wuthering Heights', author: 'Emily Brontë' },
  { title: 'Jane Eyre', author: 'Charlotte Brontë' },
  { title: 'The Raven', author: null },
  { title: 'Eleonora', author: null },
  { title: 'Catweazle', author: null }
]
```

```sql [SQL]
SELECT
  title,
  author.name as author
FROM
  sap_capire_bookshop_Books as Books
LEFT JOIN
  sap_capire_bookshop_Authors as author
ON
  author.ID = Books.author_ID AND floor(
  (
    (

>       (cast(strftime('%Y', coalesce(author.dateOfDeath,session_context('$now'))) as Integer) - cast(strftime('%Y', author.dateOfBirth) as Integer)) * 12

Reviewer: This SQL is quite complicated and distracts from understanding the CXL expression. Maybe just use a stored calculated element ("on write"). This would then simplify the SQL of the query execution.

Reviewer 2: The SQL is only shown when navigating explicitly to the SQL tab in the code group. Yes, it is very complex, but you usually don't see it... unless you want to

    ) + (
      cast(strftime('%m', coalesce(author.dateOfDeath,session_context('$now'))) as Integer) - cast(strftime('%m', author.dateOfBirth) as Integer)
    ) + (
      (
        case
          when (cast(strftime('%Y%m', coalesce(author.dateOfDeath,session_context('$now'))) as Integer) < cast(strftime('%Y%m', author.dateOfBirth) as Integer)) then
            (cast(strftime('%d%H%M%S%f0000', coalesce(author.dateOfDeath,session_context('$now'))) as Integer) > cast(strftime('%d%H%M%S%f0000', author.dateOfBirth) as Integer))
          else
            (cast(strftime('%d%H%M%S%f0000', coalesce(author.dateOfDeath,session_context('$now'))) as Integer) < cast(strftime('%d%H%M%S%f0000', author.dateOfBirth) as Integer)) * -1
        end
      )
    )
  ) / 12) < ?
  ```
:::

The path expression `author[ age < 40 ].name`
navigates along the `author` association of the `Books` entity.

> The join for this path expression is generated as usual and enhanced with the infix filter condition `age < 40`.

Reviewer: > The join

You are again explaining in terms of join and SQL. From my point of view the join is an implementation detail. The importand part is that `author[age < 40]` is a filtered association that gives access to a book`s associated `Authors` entity only if this author's age is below 40. You don't need SQL or joins to understand this. Just set theory.

</div>

> CAP supports a set of [portable functions](../guides/databases/cql-to-sql.md#portable-functions) that can be used in all expressions. Those functions are passed through to the underlying database, allowing you to leverage the same functions for different databases, which greatly enhances portability.

Reviewer: Rather define the portable functions here (as they are DB-independent and also apply for to remote OData calls). Then link from the database guide to here.
